What is Microsoft Foundry Local?

Microsoft Foundry Local is an end-to-end, cross-platform solution that lets you run AI models entirely on your device—no cloud, no API keys, no per-token costs. It bundles a lightweight runtime, a curated catalog of optimized models, and SDKs (Python, JavaScript/TypeScript, C#/.NET, Rust) so you can ship on-device chat, transcription, embeddings, and more inside your app.
Think of it as a production-grade alternative to Ollama: instead of managing a separate server/daemon, Foundry Local runs in-process as a native library and automatically picks the best model variant for your hardware (CPU/GPU/NPU) using ONNX Runtime and hardware-specific backends (e.g., CUDA, OpenVINO, QNN).

How it helps you download and use LLMs locally (like Ollama)

* One-line install: On Windows, install the CLI via winget install Microsoft.FoundryLocal, then the foundry command is available in your terminal.
* Model catalog + auto-download: Foundry Local integrates with Microsoft’s Foundry Catalog. When your app (or CLI) requests a model (e.g., phi-4), it downloads an optimized, quantized version on first use and caches it locally for instant subsequent runs.
* Hardware-aware selection: It intelligently selects the most performant variant for your device (Intel/AMD/NVIDIA/Qualcomm), leveraging GPU/NPU acceleration where available.
* Offline, private inference: Once cached, models run with zero internet connectivity; prompts and data never leave the machine.
* SDK-first integration: Add the SDK to your project and call a simple chat/completion API; Foundry Local handles loading, inference, streaming, and unloading.

Python: pip install foundry-local-sdk
JS/TS: npm install foundry-local-sdk
.NET: dotnet add package Microsoft.AI.Foundry.Local
Rust: cargo add foundry-local-sdk

Typical CLI usage mirrors Ollama’s simplicity: after installing, you can run something like foundry model run phi-4 to start a local chat session; the model downloads automatically if not cached.

Using Foundry Local in the Foundry Toolkit for VS Code :

The Foundry Toolkit for Visual Studio Code (formerly “AI Toolkit”) consolidates Microsoft’s Foundry + local-AI tooling into one extension, and it explicitly supports local models via Foundry Local (alongside ONNX and Ollama).

1) Install prerequisites
Foundry Local runtime (CLI)
On Windows, install via:
winget install Microsoft.FoundryLocal

This gives you the foundry command and the local inference backend the toolkit will talk to.

Foundry Toolkit extension in VS Code
In VS Code:

Open Extensions (Ctrl+Shift+X)
Search for “Foundry Toolkit” (publisher: Microsoft)
Install Foundry Toolkit for Visual Studio Code

Note: The older separate “Microsoft Foundry” extension has been merged into this single Foundry Toolkit extension.

2) Enable Foundry Local inside the toolkit
Once the extension is installed:

Open the Azure / Foundry view in the Activity Bar (the Azure icon).

Look for sections like Model Catalog, Playground, or Local Models.

In the model sources/providers, you should see options for:
Foundry (cloud)

Local models via ONNX / Ollama / Foundry Local

The toolkit detects the foundry CLI/runtime on your machine and uses it to:

List available local models

Download models from the Foundry catalog to your device

Run inference locally through Foundry Local

3) Download and run a local model
From the Foundry Toolkit UI:

Open Model Catalog in the extension.

Filter or search for a model you want (e.g., a Phi variant or other Foundry-catalog model).

Choose Download / Deploy locally (wording may vary).

The extension will pull an optimized, quantized version via Foundry Local and cache it on disk.

After download, go to My Resources / Local Models (or similar) in the extension.

Select the model and click Run / Load / Open in Playground.

This starts a local chat/completion session using Foundry Local as the backend.

You can now:

Chat with the model in the Playground tab

Use it as the backend for agent templates and local agent runs

Test prompts, view traces, and iterate without any cloud calls

4) Using Foundry Local models in Copilot Chat (optional)
Earlier versions allowed selecting Foundry Local models directly as GitHub Copilot Chat providers, but as of mid-2026 this integration was adjusted:

Foundry Local models are no longer offered as GitHub Copilot Chat language model providers in some recent toolkit releases.

They still work fully inside:

Foundry Toolkit’s own Playground

Agent Builder and local agent runs

Any custom app you build using the Foundry Local SDKs

If you specifically need Copilot Chat to use a local model, you may need to:

Use another local server (e.g., Ollama/LM Studio) as the Copilot provider, or
Rely on the Foundry Toolkit’s built-in playground/agent UI instead of Copilot Chat for local inference.

5) Typical developer workflow
A common pattern:

Install: winget install Microsoft.FoundryLocal + Foundry Toolkit extension.

Discover: Use the toolkit’s Model Catalog to browse Foundry + Hugging Face models.

Download locally: One-click download via Foundry Local; models are cached on-device.

Develop & test:

Use the Playground for quick prompt experiments.

Create agent projects from templates; run and debug them locally with Foundry Local as the inference engine.

Deploy: When ready, deploy agents to Foundry Agent Service or your own backend, while keeping local testing fast and private.


















